<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE article PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook XML V4.1.2//EN" "http://www.oasis-open.org/docbook/xml/4.1.2/docbookx.dtd" [
<!ENTITY legal SYSTEM "legal.xml">
<!ENTITY version "2.26.0">
<!ENTITY date "02/10/2009">
<!ENTITY mdash "&#8212;">
<!ENTITY percnt "&#x0025;">
]>
<article id="index" lang="uk">
  <articleinfo>
    <title>Посібник з менеджера дисплеїв середовища Gnome</title>

    <revhistory>
      <revision><revnumber>0.0</revnumber> <date>2008-09</date></revision>
    </revhistory>

    <abstract role="description">
      <para>GDM - менеджер дисплеїв GNOME, графічна програма входу у сеанс.</para>
    </abstract>

    <authorgroup>
      <author><firstname>Martin</firstname><othername>K.</othername> <surname>Petersen</surname> <affiliation> <address><email>mkp@mkp.net</email></address> </affiliation></author>
      <author><firstname>George</firstname><surname>Lebl</surname> <affiliation> <address><email>jirka@5z.com</email></address> </affiliation></author>
      <author><firstname>Jon</firstname><surname>McCann</surname> <affiliation> <address><email>mccann@jhu.edu</email></address> </affiliation></author>
      <author><firstname>Ray</firstname><surname>Strode</surname> <affiliation> <address><email>rstrode@redhat.com</email></address> </affiliation></author>
      <author role="maintainer"><firstname>Brian</firstname><surname>Cameron</surname> <affiliation> <address><email>Brian.Cameron@Oracle.COM</email></address> </affiliation></author>
    </authorgroup>
    <copyright><year>1998</year> <year>1999</year> <holder>Martin K. Petersen</holder></copyright>
    <copyright><year>2001</year> <year>2003</year> <year>2004</year> <holder>George Lebl</holder></copyright>
    <copyright><year>2003</year> <year>2007</year> <year>2008</year> <holder>Red Hat, Inc.</holder></copyright>
    <copyright><year>2003</year> <year>2011</year> <holder>Oracle і/або афілейовані особи. Усі права застережено.</holder></copyright>

      <legalnotice id="legalnotice">
	<para>Дозволяється копіювати, розповсюджувати та/або змінювати цей документ на умовах ліцензії GNU Free Documentation License (GFDL), версії 1.1 або будь-якої старшої версії, що опублікована Free Software Foundation без інваріантних розділів, тексту титульної сторінки, та тексту фінальної сторінки. Копію GFDL можна знайти <ulink type="help" url="ghelp:fdl">за адресою</ulink> або у файлі COPYING-DOCS, що постачається з цією довідкою.</para>
         <para>Ця довідка є частиною збірки документації з GNOME, що постачається на умовах ліцензії GFDL. Якщо ви бажаєте розповсюджувати цю довідку окремо від збірки, можете це зробити додавши до довідки копію ліцензії, як описано у пункті 6 ліцензії.</para>

	<para>Більшість назв, що використовуються компаніями для розповсюдження їх продуктів та послуг є торговими марками. Якщо такі назви зустрічаються у документації з GNOME та учасникам проєкту документування GNOME відомо, що вони є торговими марками, тоді ці назви пишуться великими літерами або починаються з великої літери.</para>

	<para>ДОКУМЕНТ ТА ЗМІНЕНІ ВЕРСІЇ ДОКУМЕНТУ НАДАЮТЬСЯ КОРИСТУВАЧУ ЗА УМОВАМИ ЛІЦЕНЗІЇ GNU FREE DOCUMENTATION LICENSE З ПОДАЛЬШИМ РОЗУМІННЯМ ПРО ТЕ, ЩО: <orderedlist>
		<listitem>
		  <para>ДОКУМЕНТ НАДАЄТЬСЯ "ЯК Є", БЕЗ БУДЬ-ЯКИХ ГАРАНТІЇ, ЯВНИХ ЧИ НЕЯВНИХ, ВКЛЮЧАЮЧИ, АЛЕ НЕ ОБМЕЖУЮЧИСЬ, ГАРАНТІЙ ЩО ЦЕЙ ДОКУМЕНТ ЧИ ЗМІНЕНА ВЕРСІЯ ДОКУМЕНТА ВІЛЬНІ ВІД ДЕФЕКТІВ, ПРИДАТНІ ДО ПРОДАЖУ, ВІДПОВІДАЮТЬ ПЕВНІЙ МЕТІ АБО НЕ ПОРУШУЮТЬ ЧИЇСЬ ПРАВА. ВЕСЬ РИЗИК ЗА ЯКІСТЬ, ТОЧНІСТЬ, ТА ЧИННІСТЬ ЦЬОГО ДОКУМЕНТУ АБО ЙОГО ЗМІНЕНИХ ВЕРСІЙ ЛЕЖИТЬ НА ВАС.  ЯКЩО БУДЬ-ЯКИЙ ДОКУМЕНТ ЧИ ЗМІНЕНА ВЕРСІЯ БУДУТЬ ВИЗНАНІ ДЕФЕКТНИМИ У БУДЬ-ЯКОМУ ВІДНОШЕННІ, ВИ (НЕ ПОЧАТКОВИЙ УКЛАДАЧ, АВТОР АБО БУДЬ-ЯКИЙ СПІВАВТОР) БЕРЕТЕ НА СЕБЕ ВИТРАТИ ЗА БУДЬ-ЯКЕ НЕОБХІДНЕ ОБСЛУГОВУВАННЯ, РЕМОНТ ЧИ ВИПРАВЛЕННЯ. ЦЯ ВІДМОВА ВІД ГАРАНТІЙ СКЛАДАЄ ВАЖЛИВУ ЧАСТИНУ ЦІЄЇ ЛІЦЕНЗІЇ. НЕ ДОПУСКАЄТЬСЯ ВИКОРИСТАННЯ ЦЬОГО ДОКУМЕНТУ АБО ЙОГО ЗМІНЕНОЇ ВЕРСІЇ БЕЗ ПРИЙНЯТТЯ ЦІЄЇ ВІДМОВИ; ТА</para>
		</listitem>
		<listitem>
		  <para>НІ ЗА ЯКИХ ОБСТАВИН ТА ЗА БУДЬ-ЯКОГО ЗАКОНОДАВСТВА, ЧИ ТО ГРОМАДЯНСЬКОЇ ВІДПОВІДАЛЬНОСТІ (ВКЛЮЧАЮЧИ ХАЛАТНІСТЬ), ДОГОВОРУ, ЧИ ЧОГОСЬ ІНШОГО, АВТОР, ПОЧАТКОВИЙ УКЛАДАЧ, БУДЬ-ЯКИЙ СПІВАВТОР, АБО ДИСТРИБ'ЮТОР ДОКУМЕНТУ ЧИ ЗМІНЕНОЇ ВЕРСІЇ ДОКУМЕНТУ, АБО БУДЬ-ЯКИЙ ПОСТАЧАЛЬНИК БУДЬ-ЯКОЇ З ЦИХ СТОРІН, НЕ НЕСЕ ВІДПОВІДАЛЬНІСТЬ ПЕРЕД БУДЬ-ЯКОЮ ОСОБОЮ ЗА БУДЬ-ЯКІ ПРЯМІ, НЕПРЯМІ, ОСОБЛИВІ, ВИПАДКОВІ, АБО ІСТОТНІ ЗБИТКИ БУДЬ-ЯКОГО ХАРАКТЕРУ ВКЛЮЧАЮЧИ, АЛЕ НЕ ОБМЕЖУЮЧИСЬ, ЗБИТКАМИ ВІД ВТРАТИ ПРЕСТИЖУ, ЗУПИНКИ РОБОТИ, ЗБОЇВ АБО НЕСПРАВНОСТЕЙ КОМП'ЮТЕРА, АБО БУДЬ-ЯКІ ІНШІ ЗБИТКИ АБО ВТРАТИ ЩО ВИНИКЛИ БЕЗВІДНОСНО АБО ВНАСЛІДОК ВИКОРИСТАННЯ ЦЬОГО ДОКУМЕНТУ ТА ЗМІНЕНИХ ВЕРСІЙ ЦЬОГО ДОКУМЕНТУ, НАВІТЬ ЯКЩО ЦІ СТОРОНИ, МОЖЛИВО, БУЛИ ПРОІНФОРМОВАНІ ПРО МОЖЛИВІСТЬ ТАКИХ ЗБИТКІВ.</para>
		</listitem>
	  </orderedlist></para>
  </legalnotice>



    <releaseinfo>У посібнику описується менеджер дисплеїв середовища Gnome версії 2.26.0. Останній раз оновлювався 02 жовтня 2009 року.</releaseinfo>  
  
    <othercredit class="translator">
      <personname>
        <firstname>Максим Дзюманенко</firstname>
      </personname>
      <email>dziumanenko@gmail.com</email>
    </othercredit>
    <copyright>
      
        <year>2004</year>
      
        <year>2006</year>
      
      <holder>Максим Дзюманенко</holder>
    </copyright>
  
    <othercredit class="translator">
      <personname>
        <firstname>Юрій Чорноіван</firstname>
      </personname>
      <email>yurchor@ukr.net</email>
    </othercredit>
    <copyright>
      
        <year>2020</year>
      
      <holder>Юрій Чорноіван</holder>
    </copyright>
  </articleinfo>

  <!-- ============= Preface ================================== -->

  <sect1 id="preface">
    <title>Терміни та домовленості використані у цьому посібнику</title>

    <para>У посібнику описується менеджер дисплеїв середовища Gnome версії 2.26.0. Останній раз оновлювався 02 жовтня 2009 року.</para>  

    <para>Селектор - програма, що використовується для керування дисплеєм віддаленого вузла з приєднаного дисплея (<command>gdm-host-chooser</command>).</para>

    <para lang="en">
      FreeDesktop - The organization providing desktop standards, such as the
      Desktop Entry Specification used by GDM.
      <ulink type="http" url="http://www.freedesktop.org/">
      http://www.freedesktop.org</ulink>.
    </para>
    <para>GDM - менеджер дисплеїв середовища GNOME (Gnome Display Manager). Назва використовується при посиланні на програмний пакет взагалі.</para>

    <para>Програма привітання - графічне вікно входу (його роботу забезпечує <command>gnome-shell</command>).</para>

    <para>PAM - механізм модульної автентифікації</para>

    <para>XDMCP - протокол керування дисплеєм X</para>

    <para lang="en">
      Xserver - An implementation of the X Window System.  For example the
      Xorg Xserver provided by the X.org Foundation
      <ulink type="http" url="http://www.x.org/">http://www.x.org</ulink>.
    </para>

    <para lang="en">
      Paths that start with a word in angle brackets are relative to the
      installation prefix. I.e. <filename>&lt;share&gt;/pixmaps/</filename>
      refers to <filename>/usr/share/pixmaps</filename> if GDM was
      configured with <command>--prefix=/usr</command>.
    </para>
  </sect1>

  <!-- ============= Overview ================================= -->

  <sect1 id="overview">
    <title>Огляд</title>

    <sect2 id="introduction">
      <title>Введення</title>

      <para>GDM - менеджер дисплею для GNOME, у якому реалізовано більшість функцій, що вимагаються для керування локальними та віддаленими дисплеями. GDM створено "з чистого аркуша" та він не містить оригінального коду XDM / X Consortium.</para>

      <para lang="en">
        Note that GDM is configurable, and many configuration settings have
        an impact on security. Issues to be aware of are highlighted in this
        document.
      </para> 

      <para lang="en">
        Please note that some Operating Systems configure GDM to behave
        differently than the default values as described in this document.  If
        GDM does not seem to behave as documented, then check to see if any 
        related configuration may be different than described here.
      </para>

      <para>Щоб дізнатися більше про GDM, зверніться до сайта проєкту на <ulink type="http" url="http://wiki.gnome.org/Projects/GDM/">http://wiki.gnome.org/Projects/GDM</ulink>.</para>

      <para lang="en">
        For discussion or queries about GDM, refer to the
        <address><email>gdm-list@gnome.org</email></address> mail list.  This
        list is archived, and is a good resource to check to seek answers to
        common questions.  This list is archived at
        <ulink type="http" url="http://mail.gnome.org/archives/gdm-list/">
        http://mail.gnome.org/archives/gdm-list/</ulink> and has a search
        facility to look for messages with keywords.
      </para>

      <para>Будь ласка, надсилайте усі звіти щодо вад і пропозиції щодо удосконалення до категорії «gdm» на сайті <ulink type="http" url="http://bugzilla.gnome.org/">http://bugzilla.gnome.org</ulink>.</para>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="stability">
      <title>Стабільність інтерфейсу</title>

      <para lang="en">
        GDM 2.20 and earlier supported stable configuration interfaces.
        However, the codebase was completely rewritten for GDM 2.22, and
        is not completely backward compatible with older releases. This is
        in part because things work differently, so some options just don't
        make sense, in part because some options never made sense, and in
        part because some functionality has not been reimplemented yet.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        Interfaces which continue to be supported in a stable fashion include
        the Init, PreSession, PostSession, PostLogin, and Xsession scripts.
        Some daemon configuration options in the 
        <filename>&lt;etc&gt;/gdm/custom.conf</filename> file continue to be
        supported.  Also, the <filename>~/.dmrc</filename>, and face browser
        image locations are still supported.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        GDM 2.20 and earlier supported the ability to manage multiple displays
        with separate graphics cards, such as used in terminal server
        environments, login in a window via a program like Xnest or Xephyr, the
        gdmsetup program, XML-based greeter themes, and the ability to run the
        XDMCP chooser from the login screen.  These features were not 
        added back during the 2.22 rewrite.
      </para>

    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="functionaldesc">
      <title>Функціональний опис</title>

<!--
<para>
        TODO - Would be good to discuss D-Bus, perhaps the new GObject model,
               and to explain the reasons why the rewrite made GDM better.
               From a high-level overview perspective, rather than the
               technical aspects.
</para>
-->

      <para lang="en">
        GDM is responsible for managing displays on the system.  This includes
        authenticating users, starting the user session, and terminating the
        user session.  GDM is configurable and the ways it can be configured
        are described in the "Configuring GDM" section of this
        document.  GDM is also accessible for users with disabilities.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        GDM provides the ability to manage the main console display, and 
        displays launched via VT.  It is integrated with other programs, 
        such as the Fast User Switch Applet (FUSA) and gnome-screensaver
        to manage multiple displays on the console via the Xserver Virtual
        Terminal (VT) interface.  It also can manage XDMCP displays.  
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        Regardless of the display type, GDM will do the following when it
        manages the display.  It will start an Xserver process, then run the
        <filename>Init</filename> script as the root user, and start the
        greeter program on the display.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        The greeter program is run as the unprivileged "gdm"
        user/group.  This user and group are described in the
        "Security" section of this document.  The main functions of
        the greeter program are to provide a mechanism for selecting
        an account for log in and to drive the dialogue between
        the user and system when authenticating that account. The authentication
        process is driven by Pluggable Authentication Modules (PAM).  The PAM
        modules determine what prompts (if any) are shown to the user to
        authenticate.  On the average system, the greeter program will request
        a username and password for authentication.  However some systems may
        be configured to use supplemental mechanisms such as a fingerprint or
        SmartCard readers. GDM can be configured to support these
        alternatives in parallel with greeter login extensions and the
        <command>--enable-split-authentication</command>
        <filename>./configure</filename> option, or one at a
        time via system PAM configuration.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
         The smartcard extension can be enabled or disabled via the
         <filename>org.gnome.display-manager.extensions.smartcard.active</filename>
         gsettings key.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
         Likewise, the fingerprint extension can be enabled or disabled via the
         <filename>org.gnome.display-manager.extensions.fingerprint.active</filename>
         gsettings key.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        GDM and PAM can be configured to not require any
        input, which will cause GDM to automatically log in and simply
        start a session, which can be useful for some environments, such as
        single user systems or kiosks.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        In addition to authentication, the greeter program allows the user to
        select which session to start and which language to use.  Sessions are
        defined by files that end in the .desktop suffix and more information
        about these files can be found in the "GDM User Session and Language
        Configuration" section of this document.  By default, GDM is configured
        to display a face browser so the user can select their user account by
        clicking on an image instead of having to type their username. GDM
        keeps track of the user's default session and language in the user's
        <filename>~/.dmrc</filename> and will use these defaults if the user
        did not pick a session or language in the login GUI.
      </para>

      <para lang="en"> 
        After authenticating a user, the daemon runs the
        <filename>PostLogin</filename> script as root, then runs the  
        <filename>PreSession</filename> script as root.  After running these
        scripts, the user session is started.  When the user exits their 
        session, the <filename>PostSession</filename> script is run as root.
        These scripts are provided as hooks for distributions and end-users
        to customize how sessions are managed.  For example, using these 
        hooks you could set up a machine which creates the user's $HOME
        directory on the fly, and erases it on logout.  The difference 
        between the <filename>PostLogin</filename> and
        <filename>PreSession</filename> scripts is that
        <filename>PostLogin</filename> is run before the pam_open_session call
        so is the right place to do anything which should be run before the
        user session is initialized.  The <filename>PreSession</filename>
        script is called after session initialization.
      </para>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="greeterpanel">
      <title>Панель вітання</title>
      <para lang="en">
        The GDM greeter program displays a panel docked at the bottom of the
        screen which provides additional functionality.  When a user is
        selected, the panel allows the user to select which session, language,
        and keyboard layout to use after logging in.  The keyboard layout
        selector also changes the keyboard layout used when typing your
        password.  The panel also contains an area for login services to leave
        status icons.  Some example status icons include a battery icon for
        current battery usage, and an icon for enabling accessibility features.
        The greeter program also provides buttons which allow the user to
        shutdown or restart the system.  It is possible to configure GDM to not
        provide the shutdown and restart buttons, if desired.  GDM can also be
        configured via PolicyKit (or via RBAC on Oracle Solaris) to require the
        user have appropriate authorization before accepting the shutdown or
        restart request.
      </para>

      <para>Зауважте, що можливості розкладки клавіатури доступі лише у системах із підтримкою libxklavier.</para>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="accessibility">
      <title>Спеціальні можливості</title>

        <para lang="en">
          GDM supports "Accessible Login", allowing users to log into
          their desktop session even if they cannot easily use the screen,
          mouse, or keyboard in the usual way.  Accessible Technology (AT)
          features such as an on-screen keyboard, screen reader, screen
          magnifier, and Xserver AccessX keyboard accessibility are available.
          It is also possible to enable large text or high contrast icons and
          controls, if needed.  Refer to the "Accessibility
          Configuration" section of the document for more information
          how various accessibility features can be configured.
        </para>

        <para lang="en">
          On some Operating Systems, it is necessary to make sure that the GDM
          user is a member of the "audio" group for AT programs that
          require audio output (such as text-to-speech) to be functional.
        </para>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="facebrowser">
      <title>Переглядач портретів GDM</title>

      <para lang="en">
        The Face Browser is the interface which allows users to select their
        username by clicking on an image.  This feature can be enabled or
        disabled via the org.gnome.login-screen disable-user-list GSettings 
        key and is on by default.  When disabled, users must type their
        complete username by hand.  When enabled, it displays all local users
        which are available for login on the system (all user accounts defined
        in the /etc/passwd file that have a valid shell and sufficiently high
        UID) and remote users that have recently logged in.
        The face browser in GDM 2.20 and earlier would attempt to display all
        remote users, which caused performance problems in large,
        enterprise deployments.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        The Face Browser is configured to display the users who log in most
        frequently at the top of the list.  This helps to ensure that users
        who log in frequently can quickly find their login image.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        The Face Browser supports "type-ahead search" which dynamically
        moves the face selection as the user types to the corresponding username
        in the list.  This means that a user with a long username will only
        have to type the first few characters of the username before the correct
        item in the list gets selected.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        The icons used by GDM can be installed globally by the sysadmin or can
        be located in the user's home directories.  If installed globally
        they should be in the <filename>&lt;share&gt;/pixmaps/faces/</filename>
        directory and the filename should be the name of the user.  Face image
        files should be a standard image that GTK+ can read, such as PNG or
        JPEG.  Face icons placed in the global face directory must be readable
        to the GDM user.
      </para>

<!--
<para>
        TODO - In the old GDM the ~/gnome2/gdm file is used, but the new code
               seems to use ~/.gnome/gdm.  Error?
</para>
-->
      <para lang="en">
        If there is no global icon for the user, GDM will look in the user's
        $HOME directory for the image file.  GDM will first look for the user's
        face image in <filename>~/.face</filename>.  If not found, it will try 
        <filename>~/.face.icon</filename>.  If still not found, it will use the
        value defined for "face/picture=" in the 
        <filename>~/.gnome2/gdm</filename> file.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        If a user has no defined face image, GDM will use the
        "stock_person" icon defined in the current GTK+ theme.  If no
        such image is defined, it will fallback to a generic face image.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        Please note that loading and scaling face icons located in remote user
        home directories can be a very time-consuming task.  Since it not
        practical to load images over NIS or NFS, GDM does not attempt to load
        face images from remote home directories.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        When the browser is turned on, valid usernames on the computer are
        exposed for everyone to see.  If XDMCP is enabled, then the usernames
        are exposed to remote users.  This, of course, limits security
        somewhat since a malicious user does not need to guess valid usernames.
        In some very restrictive environments the face browser may not be
        appropriate.
      </para>

    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="xdmcp">
      <title>XDMCP</title>

<!--
<para>
        TODO - What XDMCP features actually work?   I know that the
               chooser is missing.
</para>
-->

      <para lang="en">
        The GDM daemon can be configured to listen for and manage X Display
        Manage Protocol (XDMCP) requests from remote displays.  By default
        XDMCP support is turned off, but can be enabled if desired.  If GDM is
        built with TCP Wrapper support, then the daemon will only grant access
        to hosts specified in the GDM service section in the TCP Wrappers
        configuration file.
      </para>

      <para>GDM включає декілька заходів, які роблять його більш стійким до атак типу <quote>відмова у обслуговуванні</quote> на службу XDMCP. Можна налаштувати значну кількість параметрів протоколу, час очікування з'єднання, тощо. Типові налаштування мають добре працювати у більшості систем.</para>

      <para lang="en">
        GDM by default listens for XDMCP requests on the normal UDP port used
        for XDMCP, port 177, and will respond to QUERY and BROADCAST_QUERY
        requests by sending a WILLING packet to the originator.
      </para>

      <para>GDM можна налаштувати на обробку INDIRECT запитів та відображення селектора вузлів на віддаленому дисплеї. GDM запам'ятовує вибір користувача та пересилає наступні запити вибраному менеджеру. GDM також підтримує розширення до протоколу, яке змушує забути про перенаправлення одразу після успішного з'єднання користувача. Це розширення підтримується якщо з обох сторін сервери GDM. Розширення прозоре і ігнорується XDM та іншими серверами, що підтримують XDMCP.</para>

      <para lang="en">
        If XDMCP seems to not be working, make sure that all machines are
        specified in <filename>/etc/hosts</filename>.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        Refer to the "Security" section for information about
        security concerns when using XDMCP.
      </para>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="logging">
      <title>Реєстрація подій</title>

      <para lang="en">
        GDM uses syslog to log errors and status.  It can also log debugging
        information, which can be useful for tracking down problems if GDM is
        not working properly.  Debug output can be enabled by setting the
        debug/Enable key to "true" in the
        <filename>&lt;etc&gt;/gdm/custom.conf</filename> file.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        Output from the various Xservers is stored in the GDM log directory,
        which is normally <filename>&lt;var&gt;/log/gdm/</filename>.  Any
        Xserver messages are saved to a file associated with the display value,
        <filename>&lt;display&gt;.log</filename>.  
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        The session output is piped through the GDM daemon to the
        <filename>~/<replaceable>$XDG_CACHE_HOME</replaceable>/gdm/session.log</filename>
        file which usually expands to <filename>~/.cache/gdm/session.log</filename>.
        The file is overwritten on each login, so logging out and logging back
        into the same user via GDM will cause any messages from the previous
        session to be lost.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        Note that if GDM can not create this file for some reason, then a
        fallback file will be created named <filename>~/<replaceable>$XDG_CACHE_HOME</replaceable>/gdm/session.log.XXXXXXXX</filename>
        where the <filename>XXXXXXXX</filename> are some random characters.
      </para>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="fusa">
      <title>Швидке перемикання користувачів</title>

      <para lang="en">
        GDM allows multiple users to be logged in at the same time.  After one
        user is logged in, additional users can log in via the User Switcher
        on the GNOME Panel, or from the "Switch User" button in Lock Screen dialog
        of GNOME Screensaver.  The active session can be changed back and forth using
        the same mechanism.  Note that some distributions may not add the User Switcher
        to the default panel configuration.  It can be added using the panel context
        menu.
      </para>
      <para lang="en">
        Note this feature is available on systems that support Virtual
        Terminals.  This feature will not function if Virtual Terminals is not
        available.
      </para>
    </sect2>
  </sect1>

  <!-- ============= Security ================================= -->

  <sect1 id="security">
    <title>Безпека</title>

    <sect2 id="gdmuser">
      <title>Користувач і група GDM</title>

      <para lang="en">
        For security reasons a dedicated user and group id are recommended for
        proper operation.  This user and group are normally "gdm" on
        most systems, but can be configured to any user or group.  All GDM
        GUI programs are run as this user, so that the programs which interact
        with the user are run in a sandbox.  This user and group should have
        limited privilege.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        The only special privilege the "gdm" user requires is the
        ability to read and write Xauth files to the
        <filename>&lt;var&gt;/run/gdm</filename> directory.  The
        <filename>&lt;var&gt;/run/gdm</filename> directory should have
        root:gdm ownership and 1777 permissions.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        You should not, under any circumstances, configure the GDM user/group
        to a user which a user could easily gain access to, such as the user
        <filename>nobody</filename>.  Any user who gains access to an Xauth
        key can snoop on and control running GUI programs running in the
        associated session or perform a denial-of-service attack on it.  It
        is important to ensure that the system is configured properly so that
        only the "gdm" user has access to these files and that it
        is not easy to login to this account.  For example, the account should
        be setup to not have a password or allow non-root users to login to the
        account.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        The GDM greeter configuration is stored in GConf.  To allow the GDM
        user to be able to write configuration, it is necessary for the 
        "gdm" user to have a writable $HOME directory.  Users may
        configure the default GConf configuration as desired to avoid the 
        need to provide the "gdm" user with a writable $HOME
        directory.  However, some features of GDM may be disabled if it is
        unable to write state information to GConf configuration.
      </para>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="PAM">
      <title>PAM</title>

      <para lang="en">
        GDM uses PAM for login authentication.  PAM stands for Pluggable
        Authentication Module, and is used by most programs that request
        authentication on your computer.  It allows the administrator to
        configure specific authentication behavior for different login programs
        (such as ssh, login GUI, screensaver, etc.)
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        PAM is complicated and highly configurable, and this documentation does
        not intend to explain this in detail.  Instead, it is intended to give
        an overview of how PAM configuration relates with GDM, how PAM is
        commonly configured with GDM, and known issues.  It is expected that
        a person needing to do PAM configuration would need to do further
        reading of PAM documentation to understand how to configure PAM and
        to understand terms used in this section.
      </para>
        
      <para lang="en">
        PAM configuration has different, but similar, interfaces on different
        Operating Systems, so check the
        <ulink type="help" url="man:pam.d">pam.d</ulink> or
        <ulink type="help" url="man:pam.conf">pam.conf</ulink> man page for
        details.  Be sure you read the PAM documentation and are comfortable
        with the security implications of any changes you intend to make to
        your configuration.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        Note that, by default, GDM uses the "gdm" PAM service name
        for normal login and the "gdm-autologin" PAM service name for
        automatic login.  These services may not be defined in your pam.d or
        pam.conf configured file.  If there is no entry, then GDM will use the
        default PAM behavior.  On most systems this should work fine.
        However, the automatic login feature may not work if the gdm-autologin
        service is not defined.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        The <filename>PostLogin</filename> script is run before
        pam_open_session is called, and the <filename>PreSession</filename>
        script is called after.  This allows the system administrator to add
        any scripting to the login process either before or after PAM 
        initializes the session.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        If you wish to make GDM work with other types of authentication
        mechanisms (such as a fingerprint or SmartCard reader), then you should
        implement this by using a PAM service module for the desired
        authentication type rather than by trying to modify the GDM code
        directly.  Refer to the PAM documentation on your system.  How to do
        this is frequently discussed on the 
        <address><email>gdm-list@gnome.org</email></address> mail list,
        so you can refer to the list archives for more information.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        PAM does have some limitations regarding being able to work with 
        multiple types of authentication at the same time, like supporting
        the ability to accept either SmartCard and the ability to type the
        username and password into the login program.  There are techniques
        that are used to make this work, and it is best to research how this
        problem is commonly solved when setting up such a configuration.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        If automatic login does not work on a system, check to see if the
        "gdm-autologin" PAM stack is defined in the PAM configuration.  For
        this to work, it is necessary to use a PAM module that simply does no
        authentication, or which simply returns PAM_SUCCESS from all of its
        public interfaces.  Assuming your system has a pam_allow.so PAM module
        which does this, a PAM configuration to enable "gdm-autologin" would
        look like this:
      </para>

<screen>
       gdm-autologin auth  required    pam_unix_cred.so.1
       gdm-autologin auth  sufficient  pam_allow.so.1
       gdm-autologin account  sufficient  pam_allow.so.1
       gdm-autologin session  sufficient  pam_allow.so.1
       gdm-autologin password  sufficient  pam_allow.so.1
</screen>

      <para lang="en">
        The above setup will cause no lastlog entry to be generated.  If a
        lastlog entry is desired, then use the following for the session:
      </para>

<screen>
       gdm-autologin session required pam_unix_session.so.1
</screen>

      <para lang="en">
        If the computer is used by several people, which makes automatic login
        unsuitable, you may want to allow some users to log in without entering
        their password. This feature can be enabled as a per-user option in
        the users-admin tool from the gnome-system-tools; it is achieved by
        checking that the user is member a Unix group called
        "nopasswdlogin" before asking for a password. For this to work,
        the PAM configuration file for the "gdm" service must include
        a line such as:
      </para>

<screen>
      gdm auth  sufficient  pam_succeed_if.so  user ingroup nopasswdlogin
</screen>

    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="utmpwtmp">
      <title>utmp і wtmp</title>

      <para lang="en">
        GDM generates utmp and wtmp User Accounting Database entries upon
        session login and logout.  The utmp database contains user access
        and accounting information that is accessed by commands such as
        <command>finger</command>, <command>last</command>,
        <command>login</command>, and <command>who</command>.  The wtmp
        database contains the history of user access and accounting 
        information for the utmp database.  Refer to the 
        <ulink type="help" url="man:utmp">utmp</ulink> and
        <ulink type="help" url="man:wtmp">wtmp</ulink>
        man pages on your system for more information.
      </para>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="xauth">
      <title>Схема аутентифікації X-серверів</title>

      <para lang="en">
        Xserver authorization files are stored in a newly created subdirectory
        of <filename>&lt;var&gt;/run/gdm</filename> at start up.  These files
        are used to store and share a "password" between X clients
        and the Xserver.  This "password" is unique for each session
        logged in, so users from one session can't snoop on users from another.
      </para>

      <para>GDM підтримує лише систему автентифікації MIT-MAGIC-COOKIE-1. Зазвичай від інших схем користі не набагато більше, тому до цих пір не було вжито зусиль для їх реалізації. При використанні XDMCP слід бути особливо обережним, тому що cookie передаються по мережі у незмінному вигляді. Якщо можливе прослуховування лінії зв'язку, тоді нападник може просто отримати ваш пароль під час реєстрації, незалежно від схеми автентифікації. Якщо прослуховування можливе але небажане, тоді використовуйте ssh для тунелювання X з'єднань, замість використання XDMCP. Ви можете розглядати XDMCP як графічний telnet, який має ті ж самі властивості безпеки. У більшості випадків слід надавати перевагу ssh -Y перед можливостями XDMCP GDM.</para>

    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="xdmcpsecurity">
      <title>Безпека XDCMP</title>

      <para lang="en">
        Even though your display is protected by cookies, XEvents and thus
        keystrokes typed when entering passwords will still go over the wire in
        clear text.  It is trivial to capture these.
      </para>

      <para>Головним чином XDMCP використовується для тонких клієнтів у лабораторних умовах. Цім тонким клієнтам для доступу до сервера необхідна лише мережа, та, здається, найкращою політикою безпеки буде тримати їх у окремій мережі, до якої неможливо отримати доступ із зовнішнього світу, а зв'язок є лише з сервером. Єдиною точкою доступу до зовнішнього світу повинен бути сервер. У цьому типі налаштувань ніколи не слід використовувати некерований концентратор або іншу придатну до вивчення ззовні мережу.</para>

    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="xdmcpaccess">
      <title>Контроль доступу XDMCP</title>

      <para lang="en">
        XDMCP access control is done using TCP wrappers.  It is possible to
        compile GDM without TCP wrapper support, so this feature may not be
        supported on some Operating Systems.
      </para>

      <para>У файлах <filename>&lt;etc&gt;/hosts.allow</filename> та <filename>&lt;etc&gt;hosts.deny</filename> слід використовувати сервер з назвою <command>gdm</command>. Наприклад, щоб заборонити доступ комп'ютерам з <filename>.evil.domain</filename> додайте </para>
<screen>
gdm: .evil.domain
</screen>
      <para>у файл <filename>&lt;etc&gt;/hosts.deny</filename>. Також можна додати</para>
<screen>
gdm: .your.domain
</screen>
      <para>у файл <filename>&lt;etc&gt;/hosts.allow</filename>, якщо ви вимикаєте усі служби з усіх вузлів. Докладнішу інформацію дивіться у man-сторінці <ulink type="help" url="man:hosts.allow">hosts.allow(5)</ulink>.</para>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="firewall">
      <title>Захист брандмауером</title>

      <para>Хоча GDM намагається ввести в оману потенційних нападників, рекомендується блокувати XDMCP (UDP порт 177) на вашому брандмауері, якщо він вам не потрібен. GDM протидіє DoS атакам (атаки типу відмови у обслуговуванні), але X протоколу властиві успадковані вади безпеки, тому його слід використовувати у контрольованому оточенні. Також кожне віддалене з'єднання споживає багато ресурсів, тому набагато простіше викликати відмову обслуговування XDMCP сервера, ніж, скажімо, у веб-сервера.</para>

      <para>Також буде розумно блокувати на брандмауері всі порти X сервера (TCP порт 6000 + номер дисплею). Зауважте, що різні частини GDM використовують дисплеї з номером 20 та більше (наприклад, при запуску серверів за вимогою).</para>

      <para lang="en">
         X is not a very safe protocol when using it over the Internet, and
         XDMCP is even less safe.
      </para>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="policykit">
      <title>PolicyKit</title>

<!--
<para>
        TODO - Should we say more?
</para>
-->

      <para lang="en">
        GDM may be configured to use PolicyKit to allow the system
        administrator to control whether the login screen should provide
        the shutdown and restart buttons on the greeter screen.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        These buttons are controlled by the
        <filename>org.freedesktop.consolekit.system.stop-multiple-users</filename>
        and
        <filename>org.freedesktop.consolekit.system.restart-multiple-users</filename>
        actions respectively.  Policy for these actions can be set up using the
        polkit-gnome-authorization tool, or the polkit-auth command line program.
      </para>
 
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="rbac">
      <title>RBAC (Role Based Access Control)</title>

      <para lang="en">
        GDM may be configured to use RBAC instead of PolicyKit.  In this
        case the RBAC configuration is used to control whether the login screen
        should provide the shutdown and restart buttons on the greeter screen.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        For example, on Oracle Solaris, the "solaris.system.shutdown"
        authorization is used to control this.  Simply modify the 
        <filename>/etc/user_attr</filename> file so that the "gdm"
        user has this authorization.
      </para>
    </sect2>

  </sect1>

  <!-- ============= ConsoleKit ================================ -->

  <sect1 id="consolekit">
    <title>Підтримка ConsoleKit</title>

<!--
<para>
    TODO - Should we update these docs?  Probably should mention any 
           configuration that users may want to do for using it with GDM?
           If so, perhaps this section should be moved to a subsection of
           the "Configure" section?
</para>
-->

    <para lang="en">
      GDM includes support for publishing user login information with the user
      and login session accounting framework known as ConsoleKit.  ConsoleKit
      is able to keep track of all the users currently logged in.  In this
      respect, it can be used as a replacement for the utmp or utmpx files that
      are available on most Unix-like Operating Systems.
    </para>

    <para lang="en">
      When GDM is about to create a new login process for a user it will call
      a privileged method of ConsoleKit in order to open a new session for this
      user.  At this time GDM also provides ConsoleKit with information about
      this user session such as: the user ID, the X11 Display name that will be
      associated with the session, the host-name from which the session
      originates (useful in the case of an XDMCP session), whether or not this
      session is attached, etc.  As the entity that initiates the user process,
      GDM is in a unique position to know about the user session and to be 
      trusted to provide these bits of information. The use of this privileged 
      method is restricted by the use of the D-Bus system message bus security 
      policy.
    </para>

    <para lang="en">
      In case a user with an existing session has authenticated
      at GDM and requests to resume that existing session, GDM calls a
      privileged method of ConsoleKit to unlock that session.  The exact
      details of what happens when the session receives this unlock signal are
      undefined and session-specific.  However, most sessions will unlock a
      screensaver in response.
    </para>

    <para lang="en">
      When the user chooses to log out, or if GDM or the session quit
      unexpectedly the user session will be unregistered from ConsoleKit.
    </para>
  </sect1>

  <!-- ============= Configuration ============================= -->

  <sect1 id="configuration">
    <title>Налаштовування</title>

    <para lang="en">
      GDM has a number of configuration interfaces.  These include scripting
      integration points, daemon configuration, greeter configuration, 
      general session settings, integration with gnome-settings-daemon
      configuration, and session configuration.  These types of integration are
      described in detail below.
    </para>

    <sect2 id="scripting">
      <title>Точки інтеграції скриптів</title>
      
      <para>Точки інтеграції скриптів GDM можна знайти у каталозі <filename>&lt;etc&gt;/gdm/</filename>:</para>

<screen>
Xsession
Init/
PostLogin/
PreSession/
PostSession/
</screen>

      <para>Усі скрипти, <filename>Init</filename>, <filename>PostLogin</filename>, <filename>PreSession</filename> і <filename>PostSession</filename>, працюють у описаний нижче спосіб.</para>

      <para lang="en">
        For each type of script, the default one which will be executed is
        called "Default" and is stored in a directory associated with
        the script type.  So the default <filename>Init</filename> script is 
        <filename>&lt;etc&gt;/gdm/Init/Default</filename>.  A per-display
        script can be provided, and if it exists it will be run instead of the 
        default script.  Such scripts are stored in the same directory as the
        default script and have the same name as the Xserver DISPLAY value for
        that display.  For example, if the <filename>&lt;Init&gt;/:0</filename>
        script exists, it will be run for DISPLAY ":0".
     </para>

     <para lang="en">
        All of these scripts are run with root privilege and return 0 if run
        successfully, and a non-zero return code if there was any failure that
        should cause the login session to be aborted.  Also note that GDM will
        block until the scripts finish, so if any of these scripts hang, this
        will cause the login process to also hang.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        When the Xserver for the login GUI has been successfully started, but
        before the login GUI is actually displayed, GDM will run the
        <filename>Init</filename> script.  This script is useful for starting
        programs that should be run while the login screen is showing, or for
        doing any special initialization if required.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        After the user has been successfully authenticated GDM will run the
        <filename>PostLogin</filename> script.  This is done before any session
        setup has been done, including before the pam_open_session call.  This
        script is useful for doing any session initialization that needs to
        happen before the session starts.  For example, you might setup the
        user's $HOME directory if needed.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        After the user session has been initialized, GDM will run the
        <filename>PreSession</filename> script.  This script is useful for
        doing any session initialization that needs to happen after the 
        session has been initialized.  It can be used for session management or
        accounting, for example.
      </para>

      <para lang="en"> 
        When a user terminates their session, GDM will run the
        <filename>PostSession</filename> script.  Note that the Xserver will
        have been stopped by the time this script is run, so it should not be
        accessed.  
      </para>

      <para>Зверніть увагу, сценарій <filename>PostSession</filename> запускається навіть якщо дисплей завершився аварійно через помилку вводу/виводу або щось подібне. Тому, не гарантується, що X-програми працюватимуть при його виконанні.</para>

      <para lang="en">
        All of the above scripts will set the
        <filename>$RUNNING_UNDER_GDM</filename> environment variable to
        <filename>yes</filename>.  If the scripts are also shared with other
        display managers, this allows you to identify when GDM is calling these
        scripts, so you can run specific code when GDM is used.
      </para>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="autostart">
      <title>Налаштовування автозапуску</title>
      
      <para lang="en">
        The <filename>&lt;share&gt;/gdm/autostart/LoginWindow</filename>
        directory contains files in the format specified by the
        "FreeDesktop.org Desktop Application Autostart
        Specification".  Standard features in the specification may be
        used to specify programs that should auto-restart or only be launched
        if a GConf configuration value is set, etc.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        Any <filename>.desktop</filename> files in this directory will cause
        the associated program to automatically start with the login GUI
        greeter.  By default, GDM is shipped with files which will autostart
        the gdm-simple-greeter login GUI greeter itself, the
        gnome-power-manager application, the gnome-settings-daemon, and the
        metacity window manager.  These programs are needed for the greeter
        program to work.  In addition, desktop files are provided for starting
        various AT programs if the configuration values specified in the
        Accessibility Configuration section below are set.
      </para>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="xsessionscript">
      <title>Скрипт Xsession</title>

      <para lang="en">
        There is also an <filename>Xsession</filename> script located at
        <filename>&lt;etc&gt;/gdm/Xsession</filename> which is called between
        the <filename>PreSession</filename> and the
        <filename>PostSession</filename> scripts.  This script does not
        support per-display like the other scripts.  This script is used for
        actually starting the user session.  This script is run as the user,
        and it will run whatever session was specified by the Desktop session
        file the user selected to start. 
      </para>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="daemonconfig">
      <title>Конфігурація сервера</title>

      <para lang="en">
        The GDM daemon is configured using the
        <filename>&lt;etc&gt;/gdm/custom.conf</filename> file.  Default
        values are stored in GConf in the <filename>gdm.schemas</filename>
        file.  It is recommended that end-users modify the
        <filename>&lt;etc&gt;/gdm/custom.conf</filename> file because the
        schemas file may be overwritten when the user updates their system to
        have a newer version of GDM.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        Note that older versions of GDM supported additional configuration
        options which are no longer supported in the latest versions of GDM.
      </para>

      <para>Файл <filename>&lt;etc&gt;/gdm/custom.conf</filename> має синтаксис <filename>keyfile</filename>. Ключові слова у дужках визначають розділи груп, рядки перед знаком <quote>дорівнює</quote> (=) є ключами, а дані після знаку тотожності є їх значеннями. Порожні рядки або рядки, що починаються зі знаку (#) ігноруються.</para>

      <para lang="en">
        The file <filename>&lt;etc&gt;/gdm/custom.conf</filename> supports the
        "[daemon]", "[security]", and "[xdmcp]"
        group sections.  Within each group, there are particular key/value
        pairs that can be specified to modify how GDM behaves.  For example,
        to enable timed login and specify the timed login user to be a user
        named "you", you would modify the file so it contains the
        following lines:
      </para>
     
<screen>
[daemon]
TimedLoginEnable=true
TimedLogin=you
</screen>

      <para>Нижче наведено повний список підтримуваних ключів налаштувань:</para>

      <sect3 id="choosersection">
        <title>[chooser]</title>
        <variablelist>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>Multicast</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>Multicast=false</synopsis>
              <para>Якщо має значення true та увімкнено IPv6, селектор буде надсилати multicast-запити у локальну мережу та слухати відповідь від вузлів, які входять у multicast-групу.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
         
          <varlistentry>
            <term>MulticastAddr</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>MulticastAddr=ff02::1</synopsis>
              <para>У цьому параметрі вказується multicast.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
        </variablelist>
      </sect3>

      <sect3 id="daemonsection">
        <title>[daemon]</title>
        <variablelist>
          <varlistentry>
            <term>TimedLoginEnable</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>TimedLoginEnable=false</synopsis>
              <para>Чи має запускатись сеанс користувача, вказаного у параметрі <filename>TimedLogin</filename>, після певної кількості секунд (у параметрі <filename>TimedLoginDelay</filename>) відсутності активності у вікні входу. Використовується для терміналів загального доступу або навіть у домашньому використанні. Якщо користувач використовує клавіатуру або переглядає меню, відлік часу скидається на <filename>TimedLoginDelay</filename> або 30 секунд, в залежності від того яке значення більше. Якщо користувач не ввів ім'я а просто натиснув на клавішу ENTER, тоді GDM вважає що користувач бажає негайно увійти з іменем користувача відкладеного входу. Зауважте, при цьому не запитується пароль, тож будьте обережні,  хоча при використанні PAM можна налаштувати запит паролю перш, ніж дозволити вхід. Зверніться до розділу «Безпека-&gt;PAM» підручника, щоб дізнатися більше, або за додатковими відомостями, якщо ця можливість не працює.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>TimedLogin</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>TimedLogin=</synopsis>
              <para lang="en">
                This is the user that should be logged in after a specified
                number of seconds of inactivity.
              </para>
              <para lang="en">
                If the value ends with a vertical bar | (the pipe symbol),
                then GDM will execute the program specified and use whatever
                value is returned on standard out from the program as the user.
                The program is run with the DISPLAY environment variable set so
                that it is possible to specify the user in a per-display
                fashion.  For example if the value is "/usr/bin/getloginuser|",
                then the program "/usr/bin/getloginuser" will be run to get the
                user value.
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>TimedLoginDelay</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>TimedLoginDelay=30</synopsis>
              <para lang="en">
                Delay in seconds before the <filename>TimedLogin</filename>
                user will be logged in.
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>AutomaticLoginEnable</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>AutomaticLoginEnable=false</synopsis>
              <para lang="en">
                If true, the user given in <filename>AutomaticLogin</filename>
                should be logged in immediately. This feature is like timed
                login with a delay of 0 seconds.
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>AutomaticLogin</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>AutomaticLogin=</synopsis>
              <para lang="en">
                This is the user that should be logged in immediately if
                <filename>AutomaticLoginEnable</filename> is true.
              </para>
              <para lang="en">
                If the value ends with a vertical bar | (the pipe symbol),
                then GDM will execute the program specified and use whatever
                value is returned on standard out from the program as the user.
                The program is run with the DISPLAY environment variable set so
                that it is possible to specify the user in a per-display
                fashion.  For example if the value is "/usr/bin/getloginuser|",
                then the program "/usr/bin/getloginuser" will be run to get the
                user value.
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>User</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>User=gdm</synopsis>
              <para lang="en">
                The username under which the greeter and other GUI programs
                are run.  Refer to the <filename>Group</filename>
                configuration key and to the "Security-&gt;GDM User And
                Group" section of this document for more information.
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>Group</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>Group=gdm</synopsis>
              <para lang="en">
                The group name under which the greeter and other GUI programs
                are run.  Refer to the <filename>User</filename>
                configuration key and to the "Security-&gt;GDM User And
                Group" section of this document for more information.
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
        </variablelist>
      </sect3>

      <sect3 id="debugsection">
        <title>Параметри налагоджування</title>
      
        <variablelist>
          <title>[debug]</title>
          
          <varlistentry>
            <term>Enable</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>Enable=false</synopsis>
              <para lang="en">
                To enable debugging, set the debug/Enable key to
                "true" in the
                <filename>&lt;etc&gt;/gdm/custom.conf</filename>
                file and restart GDM.  Then debug output will be sent to the
                system log file (<filename>&lt;var&gt;/log/messages</filename>
                or <filename>&lt;var&gt;/adm/messages</filename> depending on
                your Operating System).
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
        </variablelist>
      </sect3>

      <sect3 id="greetersection">
        <title>Параметри програми привітання</title>
      
        <variablelist>
          <title>[greeter]</title>
          
          <varlistentry>
            <term>IncludeAll</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>IncludeAll=true</synopsis>
              <para lang="en">
                If true, then the face browser will show all users on the local
                machine.  If false, the face browser will only show users who
                have recently logged in.
              </para>

              <para lang="en">
                When this key is true, GDM will call fgetpwent() to get a list
                of local users on the system.  Any users with a user id less
                than 500 (or 100 if running on Oracle Solaris) are filtered
                out.  The Face Browser also will display any users that have
                previously logged in on the system  (for example NIS/LDAP
                users).  It gets this list via calling the
                <command>ck-history</command> ConsoleKit interface.  It will
                also filter out any users which do not have a valid shell
                (valid shells are any shell that getusershell() returns -
                /sbin/nologin or /bin/false are considered invalid shells even
                if getusershell() returns them).
              </para>

              <para lang="en">
                If false, then GDM more simply only displays users that have
                previously logged in on the system (local or NIS/LDAP users) by
                calling the <command>ck-history</command> ConsoleKit interface.
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>Include</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>Include=</synopsis>
              <para lang="en">
                Set to a list of users to always include in the Face Browser.
                This value is set to a list of users separated by commas.  By
                default, the value is empty.
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>Exclude</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>Exclude=bin,root,daemon,adm,lp,sync,shutdown,halt,mail,news,uucp,operator,nobody,nobody4,noaccess,postgres,pvm,rpm,nfsnobody,pcap</synopsis>
              <para lang="en">
                Set to a list of users to always exclude in the Face Browser.
                This value is set to a list of users separated by commas.  Note
                that the setting in the <filename>custom.conf</filename>
                overrides the default value, so if you wish to add additional
                users to the list, then you need to set the value to the
                default value with additional users appended to the list.
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
        </variablelist>
      </sect3>

      <sect3 id="securitysection">
        <title>Параметри безпеки</title>
      
        <variablelist>
          <title>[security]</title>
          
          <varlistentry>
            <term>DisallowTCP</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>DisallowTCP=true</synopsis>
              <para lang="en">
                If true, then always append <filename>-nolisten tcp</filename>
                to the command line when starting attached Xservers, thus
                disallowing TCP connection.  This is a more secure
                configuration if you are not using remote connections.
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
        </variablelist>
      </sect3>

      <sect3 id="xdmcpsection">
        <title>Підтримка XDCMP</title>

        <variablelist>
          <title>[xdmcp]</title>
          
          <varlistentry>
            <term>DisplaysPerHost</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>DisplaysPerHost=1</synopsis>
              <para>Щоб нападники не змогли наводнити запитами чергу очікування, GDM допускає одне з'єднання з одного віддаленого комп'ютера. Якщо ви бажаєте надавати дисплей комп'ютерам з більш ніж одним екраном, відповідно слід збільшити  значення <filename>DisplaysPerHost</filename>.</para>

              <para lang="en">
                Note that the number of attached DISPLAYS allowed is not 
                limited.  Only remote connections via XDMCP are limited by
                this configuration option.
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>Enable</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>Enable=false</synopsis>
              <para>Встановлення значення у true вмикає підтримку XDMCP, що дозволяє керувати GDM віддаленими дисплеями/X-терміналами.</para>
            
              <para><filename>gdm</filename> очікує запити на UDP-порту 177. Докладніше дивіться у параметрі Port.</para>
              
              <para>Якщо GDM скомпільовано з бібліотекою tcp_wrapper, доступ з віддалених дисплеїв може контролюватись цією бібліотекою. Назва служби -  <filename>gdm</filename></para>
            
              <para>До файла <filename>&lt;etc&gt;/hosts.allow</filename> слід додати <screen>
gdm:.my.domain
</screen>, в залежності від конфігурації бібліотеки TCP Wrappers. Докладнішу інформацію дивіться у man-сторінці <ulink type="help" url="man:hosts.allow">hosts.allow</ulink>.</para>
              
              <para>Зауважте, що XDMCP не є безпечним протоколом, тому якщо ви не використовуєте UDP-порт 177, його краще заблокувати на вашому брандмауері.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          
          <varlistentry>
            <term>HonorIndirect</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>HonorIndirect=true</synopsis>
              <para>Дозволяє XDMCP INDIRECT вибір (тобто віддалене виконання <filename>gdmchooser</filename>) для X-терміналів, як не мають власної програми перегляду дисплеїв.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
        
          <varlistentry>
            <term>MaxPending</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>MaxPending=4</synopsis>
              <para>Для запобігання атакам типу "відмова у доступі", GDM має фіксований розмір черги з'єднань. Одночасно можуть бути запущені лише MaxPending дисплеїв.</para>
            
              <para>Зауважте, що цей параметр не обмежує кількість віддалених дисплеїв, якими можна керувати. Обмежується лише кількість дисплеїв які одночасно ініціюють з'єднання.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          
          <varlistentry>
            <term>MaxSessions</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>MaxSessions=16</synopsis>
              <para>Визначає максимальну кількість одночасних з'єднань з віддаленими дисплеями. Тобто загальну кількість віддалених дисплеїв які використовуються на вашому вузлі.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
        
          <varlistentry>
            <term>MaxWait</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>MaxWait=30</synopsis>
              <para>Коли GDM готовий керувати дисплеєм, йому надсилається пакет ACCEPT  який містить унікальний ідентифікатор сеансу, що використовується у майбутніх пакетах XDMCP.</para>
            
              <para>Потім GDM зберігає ідентифікатор сеансу у черзі, очікуючи відповіді від дисплея пакетом MANAGE.</para>
            
              <para>Якщо відповідь не надійшла протягом MaxWait секунд, GDM вважає дисплей мертвим та стирає його з черги очікування звільняючи слот для іншого дисплею.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          
          <varlistentry>
            <term>MaxWaitIndirect</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>MaxWaitIndirect=30</synopsis>
              <para>Параметр MaxWaitIndirect визначає максимальну кількість секунд між часом, коли користувач вибрав вузол та наступним непрямим запитом до вузла. При перевищенні інтервалу очікування, інформація про вибраний вузол забувається та слот непрямого запиту звільняється. Інформація може відкинутись раніше, якщо вузлів, що намагаються надіслати непрямі запити більше за <filename>MaxPendingIndirect</filename>.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
        
          <varlistentry>
            <term>PingIntervalSeconds</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>PingIntervalSeconds=60</synopsis>
              <para lang="en">
                If the Xserver does not respond in the specified number of
                seconds, then the connection is stopped and the session ended.
                When this happens the daemon dies with an ALARM signal.
                Note that GDM 2.20 and earlier multiplied this setting by 2,
                so it may be necessary to increase the timeout if upgrading
                from GDM 2.20 and earlier to a newer version.
              </para>

              <para>Зауважте, що GDM у минулому мав ключ конфігурації <filename>PingInterval</filename>, який вказував час у хвилинах. Для більшості застосувань XDMCP не потрібно, щоб значення цього параметра було менше за одну хвилину, проте затримка більша за 15 секунд означатиме, що термінал вимкнений або перезавантажений, та вам слід завершити сеанс.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>Port</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>Port=177</synopsis>
              <para>Номер UDP-порту, на якому <filename>gdm</filename> очікуватиме XDMCP-запитів. Не змінюйте його, якщо ви не впевнені у наслідках своїх дій.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>Willing</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>Willing=&lt;etc&gt;/gdm/Xwilling</synopsis>
              <para>Коли сервер надсилає пакет WILLING у відповідь на QUERY, він надсилає рядок з поточним статусом цього сервера. Типовим повідомленням є системний ідентифікатор, але можна створити власний сценарій, який відображатиме власне повідомлення. Якщо цей сценарій не існує або цей ключ порожній - надсилається типове повідомлення. Якщо цей сценарій успішно виконується та виводить деякий текст, надсилається перший рядок цього тексту (та лише перший рядок). Він запускається максимум раз на 3 секунди для запобігання можливим атакам типу "відмова у доступі" шляхом затоплення його запитами QUERY.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
        </variablelist>
      </sect3>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="greeterconfiguration">
        <title>Проста конфігурація програми привітання</title>

        <para lang="en">
          The GDM default greeter is called the simple Greeter and is
          configured via GConf.  Default values are stored in GConf in the
          <filename>gdm-simple-greeter.schemas</filename> file.  These defaults
          can be overridden if the "gdm" user has a writable $HOME
          directory to store GConf settings.  These values can be edited using
          the <command>gconftool-2</command> or <command>gconf-editor</command>
          programs.  The following configuration options are supported:
        </para>

        <variablelist>
          <title>Ключі конфігурації програми привітання</title>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>/apps/gdm/simple-greeter/banner_message_enable</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>false (булеве)</synopsis>
              <para>Керує тим, чи буде показано текст повідомлення банера.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>/apps/gdm/simple-greeter/banner_message_text</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>NULL (рядок)</synopsis>
              <para>Вказує повідомлення текстового банера, яке слід показати у вікні привітання.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>/apps/gdm/simple-greeter/disable_restart_buttons</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>false (булеве)</synopsis>
              <para lang="en">
                Controls whether to show the restart buttons in the login
                window.
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>/apps/gdm/simple-greeter/disable_user_list</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>false (булеве)</synopsis>
              <para lang="en">
                If true, then the face browser with known users is not shown
                in the login window.
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>/apps/gdm/simple-greeter/logo_icon_name</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>computer (рядок)</synopsis>
              <para lang="en">
                Set to the themed icon name to use for the greeter logo.
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>/apps/gdm/simple-greeter/recent-languages</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>[] (список рядків)</synopsis>
              <para lang="en">
                Set to a list of languages to be shown by default in the login
                window.  Default value is "[]".  With the default setting only
                the system default language is shown and the option "Other..."
                which pops-up a dialog box showing a full list of available
                languages which the user can select.
              </para>

              <para lang="en">
                Users are not intended to change this setting by hand.  Instead
                GDM keeps track of any languages selected in this configuration
                key, and will show them in the language combo box along with
                the "Other..." choice.  This way, commonly selected languages
                are easier to select.
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>/apps/gdm/simple-greeter/recent-layouts</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>[] (список рядків)</synopsis>
              <para lang="en">
                Set to a list of keyboard layouts to be shown by default in the
                login panel.  Default value is "[]".  With the default setting
                only the system default keyboard layout is shown and the option
                "Other..." which pops-up a dialog box showing a full list of
                available keyboard layouts which the user can select.
              </para>

              <para lang="en">
                Users are not intended to change this setting by hand.  Instead
                GDM keeps track of any keyboard layouts selected in this
                configuration key, and will show them in the keyboard layout
                combo box along with the "Other..." choice.  This way, commonly
                selected keyboard layouts are easier to select.
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>/apps/gdm/simple-greeter/wm_use_compiz</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>false (булеве)</synopsis>
              <para lang="en">
                Controls whether compiz is used as the window manager instead
                of metacity.
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
        </variablelist>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="accessibilityconfiguration">
     <title>Налаштовування спеціальних можливостей</title>

      <para>У цьому розділі описано параметри налаштування доступності, якими можна скористатися у GDM.</para>

      <sect3 id="accessibilitydialog">
        <title>Вікно доступності GDM і ключі GConf</title>

        <para lang="en">
         The GDM greeter panel at the login screen displays an accessibility
         icon.  Clicking on that icon opens the GDM Accessibility Dialog.  In
         the GDM Accessibility Dialog, there is a list of checkboxes, so the
         user can enable or disable the associated assistive tools.
        </para>

        <para lang="en">
         The checkboxes that correspond to the on-screen keyboard, screen
         magnifier and screen reader assistive tools act on the three GConf
         keys that are described in the next section of this document. By
         enabling or disabling these checkboxes, the associated GConf key is
         set to "true" or "false".  When the GConf key is set to true, the 
         assistive tools linked to this GConf key are launched.  When the 
         GConf key is set to "false", any running assistive tool linked to
         this GConf key are terminated.  These GConf keys are not automatically
         reset to a default state after the user has logged in.  Consequently,
         the assistive tools that were running during the last GDM login
         session will automatically be launched at the next GDM login session.
        </para>

        <para lang="en">
         The other checkboxes in the GDM Accessibility Dialog do not have
         corresponding GConf keys because no additional program is launched to
         provide the accessibility features that they offer.  These other
         options correspond to accessibility features that are provided by the
         Xserver, which is always running during the GDM session.
        </para>
      </sect3>

      <sect3 id="accessibilitygconfconfiguration">
        <title>Ключі доступності GConf</title>

        <para lang="en">
         GDM offers the following GConf keys to control its accessibility
         features:
        </para>

        <variablelist>
          <title>Ключі налаштувань GDM</title>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>/desktop/gnome/interface/accessibility</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>false (булеве)</synopsis>
              <para lang="en">
                Controls whether the Accessibility infrastructure will be
                started with the GDM GUI.  This is needed for many
                accessibility technology programs to work.
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term>/desktop/gnome/applications/at/screen_magnifier_enabled</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>false (булеве)</synopsis>
              <para lang="en">
                If set, then the assistive tools linked to this GConf key will
                be started with the GDM GUI program.  By default this is a
                screen magnifier application.
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term>/desktop/gnome/applications/at/screen_keyboard_enabled</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>false (булеве)</synopsis>
              <para lang="en">
                If set, then the assistive tools linked to this GConf key will
                be started with the GDM GUI program.  By default this is an
                on-screen keyboard application.
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term>/desktop/gnome/applications/at/screen_reader_enabled</term>
            <listitem>
              <synopsis>false (булеве)</synopsis>
              <para lang="en">
                If set, then the assistive tools linked to this GConf key will
                be started with the GDM GUI program.  By default this is a
                screen reader application.
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
        </variablelist>
      </sect3>

      <sect3 id="accessibilitytoolsconfiguration">
        <title>Пов'язування ключів GConf до інструментів доступності</title>

        <para lang="en">
         For the screen_magnifier_enabled, the screen_keyboard_enabled, and the
         screen_reader_enabled GConf keys, the assistive tool which gets
         launched depends on the desktop files located in the GDM autostart
         directory as described in the "Autostart Configuration" section of
         this manual.  Any desktop file in the GDM autostart directory can be
         linked to these GConf key via specifying that GConf key in the
         AutostartCondition value in the desktop file.  So the exact
         AutostartCondition line in the desktop file could be one of the
         following:
        </para>

<screen>
AutostartCondition=GNOME /desktop/gnome/applications/at/screen_keyboard_enabled
AutostartCondition=GNOME /desktop/gnome/applications/at/screen_magnifier_enabled
AutostartCondition=GNOME /desktop/gnome/applications/at/screen_reader_enabled
</screen>

        <para lang="en">
         When an accessibility key is true, then any program which is linked to
         that key in a GDM autostart desktop file will be launched (unless the
         Hidden key is set to true in that desktop file).  A single GConf key
         can even start multiple assistive tools if there are multiple desktop
         files with this AutostartCondition in the GDM autostart directory.
        </para>
      </sect3>

      <sect3 id="accessibilitytoolexample">
        <title>Приклад внесення змін до налаштувань засобу спеціальних можливостей</title>

        <para lang="en">
         For example, if GNOME is distributed with GOK as the default on-screen
         keyboard, then this could be replaced with a different program if
         desired.  To replace GOK with the on-screen keyboard application
         "onboard" and additionally activate the assistive tool "mousetweaks"
         for dwelling support, then the following configuration is needed.
        </para>

        <para lang="en">
         Create a desktop file for onboard and a second one for mousetweaks;
         for example, onboard.desktop and mousetweaks.desktop. These files
         must be placed in the GDM autostart directory and be in the format
         as explained in the "Autostart Configuration" section of this
         document.
        </para>

        <para>Нижче наведено приклад файла <filename>onboard.desktop</filename>:</para>

<screen>
[Desktop Entry]
Encoding=UTF-8
Name=Onboard Onscreen Keyboard
Comment=Use an on-screen keyboard
TryExec=onboard
Exec=onboard --size 500x180 -x 20 -y 10
Terminal=false
Type=Application
StartupNotify=true
Categories=GNOME;GTK;Accessibility;
AutostartCondition=GNOME /desktop/gnome/applications/at/screen_keyboard_enabled
</screen>

        <para>Нижче наведено приклад файла <filename>mousetweaks.desktop</filename>:</para>

<screen>
[Desktop Entry]
Encoding=UTF-8
Name=Software Mouse-Clicks
Comment=Perform clicks by dwelling with the pointer
TryExec=mousetweaks
Exec=mousetweaks --enable-dwell -m window -c -x 20 -y 240 
Terminal=false
Type=Application
StartupNotify=true
Categories=GNOME;GTK;Accessibility;
AutostartCondition=GNOME /desktop/gnome/applications/at/screen_keyboard_enabled
</screen>

        <para lang="en">
         Note the line with the AutostartCondition that links both desktop
         files to the GConf key for the on-screen keyboard.
        </para>

        <para lang="en">
         To disable GOK from starting, the desktop file for the GOK on-screen
         keyboard must be removed or deactivated.  Otherwise onboard and GOK
         would simultaneously be started.  This can be done by removing the
         gok.desktop file from the GDM autostart directory, or by adding the
         "Hidden=true" key setting to the gok.desktop file.
        </para>

        <para lang="en">
         After making these changes, GOK will no longer be started when the
         user activates the on-screen keyboard in the GDM session; but onboard
         and mousetweaks will instead be launched.
        </para>
      </sect3>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="generalsessionconfig">
      <title>Параметри загального сеансу</title>
<!--
<para>
          TODO - I think this section should be expanded upon.  What specific
                 keys are of interest, or would some users be likely to want
                 to configure?  Also, would be good to be more specific about
                 how lock down management is handled.
</para>
-->
        <para lang="en">
          The GDM Greeter uses some of the same framework that your desktop
          session will use. And so, it is influenced by a number of the same
          GConf settings. For each of these settings the Greeter will use the
          default value unless it is specifically overridden by a) GDM's
          installed mandatory policy b) system mandatory policy. GDM installs
          its own mandatory policy to lock down some settings for security.
        </para>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="gnomesettingsdaemon">
      <title>Фонова служба параметрів GNOME</title>
<!--
<para>
          TODO - I think this section should be expanded upon.  What specific
                 keys are of interest, or would some users be likely to want
                 to configure?  Also, would be good to give a more complete
                 list of plugins that users might want to consider disabling.
                 Also, shouldn't we list the sound/active key in the Greeter
                 configuration setting?  Oddly I do not find this key used
                 in anything but the chooser in SVN.
</para>
-->

        <para lang="en">
          GDM enables the following gnome-settings-daemon plugins:
          a11y-keyboard, background, sound, xsettings.
        </para>

        <para lang="en">
          These are responsible for things like the background image, font and
          theme settings, sound events, etc.
        </para>

        <para lang="en">
          Plugins can also be disabled using GConf. For example, if you want to
          disable the sound plugin then unset the following key:
          <filename>/apps/gdm/simple-greeter/settings-manager-plugins/sound/active</filename>.
        </para>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="sessionconfig">
      <title>Налаштовування сеансу GDM</title>

      <para lang="en">
        GDM sessions are specified using the FreeDesktop.org Desktop Entry
        Specification, which can be referenced at the following URL:
        <ulink url="http://www.freedesktop.org/wiki/Specifications/desktop-entry-spec">
        http://www.freedesktop.org/wiki/Specifications/desktop-entry-spec</ulink>.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        By default, GDM will install desktop files in the
        <filename>&lt;share&gt;/xsessions</filename> directory.  GDM will
        search the following directories in this order to find desktop files:
        <filename>&lt;etc&gt;/X11/sessions/</filename>,
        <filename>&lt;dmconfdir&gt;/Sessions</filename>, 
        <filename>&lt;share&gt;/xsessions</filename>, and
        <filename>&lt;share&gt;/gdm/BuiltInSessions</filename>.  By default the
        <filename>&lt;dmconfdir&gt;</filename> is set to
        <filename>&lt;etc&gt;/dm/</filename> unless GDM is configured to use
        a different directory via the "--with-dmconfdir" option.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        A session can be disabled by editing the desktop file and adding a line
        as follows: <filename>Hidden=true</filename>.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
        GDM desktop files support a GDM-specific extension, a key named
        "X-GDM-BypassXsession".  If the key is not specified in a
        desktop file, the value defaults to "false".  If this key is
        specified to be "true" in a desktop file, then GDM will
        launch the program specified by the desktop file "Exec" key
        directly when starting the user session.  It will not run the program
        via the <filename>&lt;etc&gt;/gdm/Xsession</filename> script, which is
        the normal behavior.  Since bypassing the
        <filename>&lt;etc&gt;/gdm/Xsession</filename> script avoids setting up
        the user session with the normal system and user settings, sessions
        started this way can be useful for debugging problems in the system or
        user scripts that might be preventing a user from being able to start
        a session.
      </para>

    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="userconfig">
      <title>Налаштовування сеансу користувача і мови GDM</title>
      <para lang="en">
        The user's default session and language choices are stored in the
        <filename>~/.dmrc</filename> file.  When a user logs in for the first
        time, this file is created with the user's initial choices.  The user
        can change these default values by simply changing to a different value
        when logging in.  GDM will remember this change for subsequent logins.
      </para>

      <para>Файл <filename>~/.dmrc</filename> є файлом у стандартному форматі <filename>INI</filename>. У ньому є один розділ із назвою <filename>[Desktop]</filename>, який містить два ключі: <filename>Session</filename> і <filename>Language</filename>.</para>

      <para lang="en">
        The <filename>Session</filename> key specifies the basename of the
        session <filename>.desktop</filename> file that the user wishes to
        normally use without the <filename>.desktop</filename> extension.
        The <filename>Language</filename> key specifies the language that the
        user wishes to use by default.  If either of these keys is missing, the
        system default is used.  The file would normally look as follows:
      </para>

<screen>
[Desktop]
Session=gnome
Language=uk_UA.UTF-8
</screen>
    </sect2>

  </sect1>

  <!-- ============= GDM Commands ============================= -->

  <sect1 id="binaries">
    <title>Команди GDM</title>

    <sect2 id="sbindir_binaries">
      <title>Команди GDM адміністративного користувача</title>

      <para lang="en">
        The GDM package provides the following commands in
        <filename>sbindir</filename> intended to be run by the root user:
      </para>

      <sect3 id="gdmcommandline">
        <title>Параметри командного рядка <command>gdm</command></title>

        <para lang="en">
          <command>gdm</command> is the main daemon which sets up
          graphical login environment and starts necessary helpers.
       </para>

        <variablelist>
          <title>Параметри командного рядка <command>gdm</command></title>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>-?, --help</term>
            <listitem>
              <para>Виводить коротку довідку з переліком параметрів командного рядка.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>--fatal-warnings</term>
            <listitem>
              <para>Зробити так, щоб попередження призводили до виходу з GDM.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>--timed-exit</term>
            <listitem>
              <para>Вийти за 30 секунд. Корисно для діагностики.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>--version</term>
            <listitem>
              <para>Вивести версію сервера GDM.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
        </variablelist>
      </sect3>

      <sect3 id="gdmrestartcommandline">
        <title>Параметри командного рядка <filename>gdm-restart</filename></title>

        <para><filename>gdm-restart</filename> зупиняє та перезапускає GDM, надсилаючи службі GDM сигнал HUP. Це призводить до негайного припинення усіх сеансів та виходу користувачів, що увійшли через GDM.</para>
      </sect3>

      <sect3 id="gdmsaferestartcommandline">
        <title>Параметри командного рядка <command>gdm-safe-restart</command></title>
  
        <para><filename>gdm-safe-restart</filename> зупиняє та перезапускає GDM надсилаючи службі GDM сигнал USR1. GDM перезапускається одразу після виходу усіх користувачів.</para>
      </sect3>

      <sect3 id="gdmstopcommandline">
        <title>Параметри командного рядка <filename>gdm-stop</filename></title>

        <para><filename>gdm-stop</filename> зупиняє GDM, надсилаючи службі GDM сигнал TERM.</para>
      </sect3>
    </sect2>
  </sect1>

  <!-- ============= Troubleshooting =========================== -->

  <sect1 id="troubleshooting">
    <title>Усунення проблем</title>
<!--
<para>
      TODO - any other tips we should add?  Might be useful to highlight any
             common D-Bus configuration issues?
</para>
-->

    <para lang="en">
      This section discusses helpful tips for getting GDM working.  In general,
      if you have a problem using GDM, you can submit a bug or send an email
      to the gdm-list mailing list.  Information about how to do this is in
      the Introduction section of the document.
    </para>

    <para lang="en">
      If GDM is failing to work properly, it is always a good idea to include
      debug information.  To enable debugging, set the debug/Enable key to
      "true" in the <filename>&lt;etc&gt;/gdm/custom.conf</filename>
      file and restart GDM.  Then use GDM to the point where it fails, and
      debug output will be sent to the system log file
      (<filename>&lt;var&gt;/log/messages</filename> or
      <filename>&lt;var&gt;/adm/messages</filename> depending on your Operating
      System).  If you share this output with the GDM community via a bug
      report or email, please only include the GDM related debug information
      and not the entire file since it can be large.  If you do not see any
      GDM syslog output, you may need to configure syslog (refer to the
      <ulink type="help" url="man:syslog">syslog</ulink> man page).
    </para>

    <sect2 id="wontstart">
      <title>GDM не запускається</title>

      <para lang="en">
         There are a many problems that can cause GDM to fail to start, but
         this section will discuss a few common problems and how to approach
         tracking down a problem with GDM starting.   Some problems will 
         cause GDM to respond with an error message or dialog when it tries
         to start, but it can be difficult to track down problems when GDM
         fails silently.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
         First make sure that the Xserver is configured properly.  The 
         GDM configuration file contains a command in the [server-Standard]
         section that is used for starting the Xserver.  Verify that this
         command works on your system.  Running this command from the 
         console should start the Xserver.  If it fails, then the problem
         is likely with your Xserver configuration.  Refer to your Xserver
         error log for an idea of what the problem may be.  The problem may
         also be that your Xserver requires different command-line options.
         If so, then modify the Xserver command in the GDM configuration file
         so that it is correct for your system.
      </para>

      <para lang="en">
         Also make sure that the <filename>/tmp</filename> directory has
         reasonable ownership and permissions, and that the machine's file
         system is not full.  These problems will cause GDM to fail to start.
      </para>
    </sect2>
  </sect1>

  <!-- ============= Application License ============================= -->

  <sect1 id="license">
    <title>Ліцензія</title>
    <para>Ця програма є вільною. Ви можете поширювати та змінювати її на умовах, викладених у GNU General Public License що видана Free Software Foundation; або версії 2 ліцензії, або (на ваше розсуд довільної старшої версії.</para>
    <para>Ця програма поширюється з надією, що буде корисною, але БЕЗ БУДЬ_ЯКИХ ГАРАНТІЙ; навіть без неявної гарантії ПРИДАТНОСТІ ДО ПРОДАЖУ або ВІДПОВІДНОСТІ ПЕВНІЙ МЕТІ. Докладніше про це дивіться у <citetitle>GNU General Public License</citetitle>.</para>
    <para lang="en">
      A copy of the <citetitle>GNU General Public License</citetitle> is
      included as an appendix to the <citetitle>GNOME Users
      Guide</citetitle>.  You may also obtain a copy of the
      <citetitle>GNU General Public License</citetitle> from the Free
      Software Foundation by visiting
      <ulink type="http" url="http://www.fsf.org">their Web site</ulink> or by
      writing to
      <address lang="en">
      Free Software Foundation, Inc.
      <street>51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor</street>
      <city>Boston</city>, <state>MA</state> <postcode>02110-1301</postcode>
      <country>USA</country>
      </address>
    </para>
  </sect1>
</article>
<!-- Keep this comment at the end of the file
Local variables:
mode: sgml
sgml-omittag:t
sgml-shorttag:t
sgml-minimize-attributes:nil
sgml-always-quote-attributes:t
sgml-indent-step:2
sgml-indent-data:t
sgml-parent-document:nil
sgml-exposed-tags:nil
sgml-local-catalogs:nil
sgml-local-ecat-files:nil
End:
-->
